>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID
TODAY HE'LL SEND UP TO 300 U.S.
MILITARY ADVISERS TO IRAQ, TO
HELP BAGHDAD BLUNT THE RISE OF
SUNNI MILITANTS.
WHILE ALSO CALLING ON THE
COUNTRY'S LEADERS TO PREVENT THE
COUNTRY'S COLLAPSE.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, FROM
THE ACHIEVEMENT GAP IN THE
CLASSROOM.
TO THE EMPLOYMENT GAP IN THE
CITY AS A WHOLE.
THE PUSH TO CLOSE RACIAL
DISPARITIES IN WISCONSIN'S
CAPITAL.
>> PEOPLE DON'T COME TO MADISON
SO THEIR KIDS CAN FAIL IN
SCHOOL.
PEOPLE DON'T COME TO MADISON SO
THEIR KIDS CAN ROT IN A PRISON
CELL.
DREAMERS COME TO MADISON AND
WHEN THEY FEEL EXCLUDED FROM THE
DREAM THEY BECOME NIGHTMARES!
>> Ifill: PLUS, THE STORY OF
LANCE CORPORAL KYLE CARPENTER.
WHO FELL ON A GRENADE TO SAVE
HIS FELLOW MARINES.
AN ACT OF COURAGE AND
SELFLESSNESS THAT EARNED HIM THE
MEDAL OF HONOR.
>> I FEEL LIKE I'M ON AN EVEN
PLAYING FIELD AND AN EVEN
PLATFORM WITH EVERYBODY ELSE,
AWARDS OR NOT, WITH EVERYBODY
ELSE THAT RAISED THEIR RIGHT
HAND AND SAID, YOU KNOW I'LL
GOING INTO HARMS WAY.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: HOUSE REPUBLICANS
HAVE A NEW MAJORITY LEADER KEVIN
McCARTHY OF CALIFORNIA.
THEY REACHED THAT DECISION AFTER
MEETING BEHIND CLOSED DOORS FOR
SEVERAL HOURS TODAY TO ELECT
THEIR NEW LEADERSHIP.
McCARTHY HAD BEEN THE CHAMBER'S
MAJORITY WHIP.
HE'LL BE REPLACED BY STEVE
SCALISE OF LOUISIANA.
AFTER THE VOTE, McCARTHY SPOKE
TO REPORTERS.
>> AMERICA'S STRUGGLING.
WE'RE STRUGGLING WITH THE
STAGNANT ECONOMY, A FAILED
HEALTHCARE LAW AND SO MANY
LIVING PAYCHECK TO PAYCHECK.
WE'RE LOOKING FOR INDIVIDUALS
THAT PUT PEOPLE BEFORE POLITICS.
I'LL MAKE ONE PROMISE.
I WILL WORK EVERY SINGLE DAY TO
MAKE SURE THIS CONFERENCE HAS
THE COURAGE TO LEAD WITH THE
WISDOM TO LISTEN.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS WERE FORCED TO
SCRAMBLE TO ELECT NEW LEADERSHIP
AFTER ERIC CANTOR LOST HIS
VIRGINIA PRIMARY TO A TEA PARTY
CHALLENGER.
CANTOR WILL STEP DOWN AS HOUSE
MAJORITY LEADER JULY 31ST.
>> Ifill: AS MANY AS 75
GOVERNMENT SCIENTISTS IN ATLANTA
MAY HAVE BEEN EXPOSED TO LIVE
ANTHRAX BACTERIA.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION ISSUED THAT
WARNING TODAY.
THE AGENCY SAID RESEARCHERS AT
ONE OF THEIR HIGH-LEVEL BIO-
SECURITY LABS FAILED TO PROPERLY
INACTIVATE THE BACTERIA SAMPLES.
THOSE WHO MIGHT HAVE COME IN
CONTACT WITH IT ARE NOW BEING
OFFERED TREATMENT TO STAVE OFF
INFECTION.
>> Woodruff: THREE MIDWESTERN
STATES BRACED FOR FLOODING TODAY
AFTER TORRENTIAL RAIN AND HEAVY
THUNDERSTORMS ALL THIS WEEK.
THE 400-MILE LONG BIG SIOUX
RIVER IS PUSHING RECORD LEVELS,
ALREADY FLOODING PARTS OF IOWA,
NEBRASKA AND SOUTH DAKOTA.
RESIDENTS ARE FILLING SAND BAGS
AND SHORING UP THEIR HOMES
AGAINST THE ENCROACHING WATER.
THE BIG SIOUX RIVER IS EXPECTED
TO CREST TOMORROW MORNING, A
FOOT ABOVE THE RECORD THAT WAS
SET IN 1969.
>> Ifill: IN WISCONSIN, STATE
PCUTORS HAVE ACCUSED
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR SCOTT WALKER
OF ILLEGAL FUNDRAISING.
NEWLY UNSEALED COURT DOCUMENTS
SHOW PROSECUTORS ALLEGE HE WAS
PART OF COORDINATED FUNDRAISING
WITH CONSERVATIVE GROUPS IN A
NATIONWIDE CRIMINAL SCHEME.
NO CHARGES HAVE BEEN FILED
AGAINST WALKER OR ANY MEMBER OF
HIS STAFF.
THE INVESTIGATION BEGAN IN 2012
WHEN WALKER FACED A RECALL
ELECTION, BUT A FEDERAL JUDGE
PUT IT ON HOLD IN MAY.
>> Ifill: PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS AND UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT FORCES WERE LOCKED IN
INTENSE FIGHTING IN EASTERN
UKRAINE TODAY.
THE REBELS TRIED TO ORGANIZE
THEIR FORCES, BUT SAID THEY WERE
OUTNUMBERED AND OUTGUNNED. A TOP
REBEL COMMANDER BEGGED RUSSIA
FOR HELP.
IN LONDON, NATO CHIEF ANDERS
FOGH RASMUSSEN SAID RUSSIA HAS
RESUMED A MILITARY BUILDUP ALONG
THE BORDER.
>> WE CALL ON RUSSIA TO STOP THE
FLOW OF WEAPONS AND EQUIPMENT
FROM RUSSIA TO SEPARATIST GROUPS
IN EASTERN UKRAINE, WE CALL ON
RUSSIA TO STOP THE SUPPORT FOR
PRO-RUSSIAN ARMED GANGS IN
EASTERN UKRAINE.
>> Ifill: BUT RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN SAID TODAY HE HAS
REJECTED THE REBEL'S PLEAS FOR
HELP.
>> Woodruff: ISRAELI SOLDIERS
CLASHED WITH PALESTINIANS IN THE
WEST BANK, AS THEY SEARCHED FOR
THREE MISSING ISRAELI TEENAGERS.
THE TEENS DISAPPEARED A WEEK AGO
WHILE HITCHHIKING HOME FROM THE
WEST BANK.
THE ISRAELI RAID TOOK PLACE
OVERNIGHT IN JENIN.
ABOUT 300 PALESTINIANS THREW
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES AND OPENED
FIRE.
30 WERE ARRESTED.
>> Ifill: SPAIN SWORE IN A NEW
KING TODAY.
FELIPE THE SIXTH SUCCEEDS HIS
76-YEAR-OLD FATHER, JUAN CARLOS,
WHO GAVE UP THE THRONE AFTER
NEARLY 40 YEARS IN POWER.
FELIPE WAS FORMALLY PROCLAIMED
THE NEW MONARCH DURING A
CEREMONY IN PARLIAMENT.
ALTHOUGH HE WIELDS NO EXECUTIVE
POWER, THE KING PROMISED A
REINVIGORATED MONARCHY FOR NEW
TIMES.
>> Woodruff: STOCKS ON WALL
STREET SAW VERY LITTLE MOVEMENT
TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED NEARLY 15 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 16,921; THE NASDAQ FELL THREE
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,359; THE
S&P 500 ADDED TWO POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 1,959.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR.
THE PRESIDENT'S DECISION TO SEND
MILITARY ADVISERS TO IRAQ.
A TRIAL THAT COULD LEAD TO BIG
CHANGES FOR COLLEGE ATHLETICS.
FROM EDUCATION TO JOBS, CLOSING
RACIAL GAPS IN WISCONSIN'S
CAPITAL.
A FRESH LOOK AT THE FIGHT OVER
GAY RIGHTS.
AND ONE MARINE'S STORY OF
COURAGE AND SELFLESSNESS IN HIS
OWN WORDS.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED TODAY THAT HE WILL BE
SENDING UP TO 300 MILITARY
ADVISORS TO PROTECT U.S.
INTERESTS IN IRAQ BUT PUSHED
AGAIN FOR THE COUNTRY'S LEADERS
TO COME UP WITH THEIR OWN
POLITICAL SOLUTION.
>> WE DO NOT HAVE THE ABILITY TO
SIMPLY SOLVE THIS PROBLEM BY
SENDING IN TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
TROOPS AND COMMITTING THE KINDS
OF BLOOD AND TREASURE THAT HAS
ALREADY BEEN EXPENDED IN IRAQ.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED HE WOULD INSTEAD
DISPATCH SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY TO THE REGION THIS
WEEKEND.
HE ALSO PLEDGED TO INCREASE
SUPPORT FOR IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES THROUGH INTELLIGENCE
SHARING AND COORDINATION.
THE U.S. HE SAID WOULD NOT RULE
OUT TARGETED STRIKES AGAINST
INSURGENTS IF EVENTS ON THE
GROUND DEMAND IT.
BUT THE PRESIDENT SAID
REPEATEDLY THAT IT IS THE IRAQIS
THEMSELVES WHO WILL ULTIMATELY
BE RESPONSIBLE FOR STABILIZING
WHAT HE DESCRIBED AS A DIRE
SITUATION.
>> REGARDLESS OF WHAT'S HAPPENED
IN THE PAST, RIGHT NOW IS A
MOMENT WHERE THE FATE OF IRAQ
HANGS IN THE BALANCE.
AND THE TEST FOR ALL OF THEM IS
GOING TO BE WHETHER THEY CAN
OVERCOME THE MISTRUST, THE DEEP
SECTARIAN DIVISIONS, IN SOME
CASES JUST POLITICAL
OPPORTUNISM, AND SAY, THIS IS
BIGGER THAN ANYONE OF US, AND
WE'VE GOT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE DO WHAT'S RIGHT FOR THE IRAQI
PEOPLE.
AND THAT'S A CHALLENGE.
THAT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT THE
UNITED STATES CAN DO FOR THEM.
>> Ifill: MR. OBAMA ALSO SAID HE
WOULD BE OPEN TO WORKING WITH
IRAN SO LONG AS THEY SEND THE
SAME UNIFYING MESSAGE TO THE
SHIA-RUN GOVERNMENT.
>> IF IRAN IS COMING IN SOLELY
AS AN ARMED FORCE ON BEHALF OF
THE SHIA AND IT-- IF IT IS
FRAMED IN THAT FASHION, THEN
THAT PROBABLY WORSENS THE
SITUATION AND THE PROSPECT FOR A
GOVERNMENT FORMATION THAT WOULD
ACTUALLY BE CONSTRUCTIVE OVER
THE LONG TERM.
>> Ifill: LEFT UNADDRESSED: THE
FUTURE OF NOURI AL MALIKI, WHO
IS FAULTED IN SOME QUARTERS FOR
FANNING THE SECTARIAN DIVISIONS
NOW ROILING THE COUNTRY.
MIKI'S POLITICAL MOVEMENT WON
THE MOST SEATS IN APRIL'S
ELECTION, AND THE PRESIDENT
SUGGESTED TODAY IRAQIS WOULD
HAVE TO SORT OUT INTERNAL
POLITICS ON THEIR OWN.
BUT "THE NEW YORK TIMES"
REPORTED TODAY THAT U.S.
OFFICIALS HAVE ALREADY SIGNALED
TO OPPOSITION LEADERS IN BAGHDAD
THAT MALIKI STEP DOWN.
SOMETHING MANY SUNNI LEADERS
HAVE ALREADY DEMANDED.
>> ( translated ): WE THINK AL-
MALIKI HAS COMPLETELY LOST HIS
BALANCE.
WE ADVISE HIM TO LEAVE
GOVERNMENT, BECAUSE I CAN'T
IMAGINE THAT, WITH AL-MALIKI
REMAINING, THE IRAQI CRISIS WILL
BE SOLVED.
>> Ifi: MAllLI, A SHIITE,
JOINED WITH OTHER IRAQI LEADERS
CALLING FOR UNITY EARLIER THIS
WEEK.
MEANWHILE, BATTLES RAGED ON
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, AS
GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS AND
HELICOPTERS FACED OFF AGAINST
SUNNI EXTREMISTS AT THE
SPRAWLING BEIJI REFINERY NORTH
OF BAGHDAD.
AN IRAQI WITNESS TOLD THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS THAT BLACK I-S-
I-L BANNERS NOW HANG ON FACILITY
TOWERS AND MILITANTS MAN
CHECKPOINTS.
BUT OFFICIALS INSISTED
GOVERNMENT FORCES MAINTAIN
CONTROL OF WHAT IS THE COUNTRY'S
LARGEST OIL REFINERY.
THE IRAQI DEFENSE MINISTRY ALSO
RELEASED VIDEO OF TARGETED IRAQI
AIR STRIKES NEAR THE CITY OF TAL
AFAR.
A MILITARY SPOKESMAN CLAIMED THE
BOMBINGS KILLED 50 MILITANTS.
ELSEWHERE, IRAQI EMERGENCY
POLICE PATROLLED STREETS AND
CHECK POINTS THROUGHOUT THE
NORTHERN CITY OF KIRKUK.
KURDISH PESHMERGA FORCES HADDIVD
OIL-RICH CITY SINCE IRAQI
MILITARY FORCES RETREATED LAST
WEEK.
>> ( translated ): SECURITY
FORCES AND PESHMERGA FORCES HAVE
CONTROL OVER KIRKUK, AND THE
SITUATION IS VERY GOOD.
STILL, THE EXODUS FROM I-S-I-L
CONTROLLED REGIONS CONTINUES.
A HUNDRED MILES SOUTHEAST OF
KIRKUK, FAMILIES PACKED INTO
PICKUP TRUCKS AND MINI-BUSES TO
FLEE TOWNS NOW IN THE GRIP OF
THE SUNNI MILITANT FORCES.
WHILE ON TELEVISION, THE
GOVERNMENT'S PUBLIC RELATIONS
BATTLE WAGED ON.
STATE RUN "IRAQIA TV" TODAY
BROADCAST PATRIOTIC FOOTAGE AND
MUSIC, INCLUDING  MESSAGES THAT
READ "ALL OF US ARE READY TO LAY
OURSELVES DOWN FOR IRAQ."
AND, "OUR SAFETY IS WITH YOUR
HELP."
IN BAGHDAD, HUNDREDS OF SHIITE
VOLUNTEERS EAGER TO JOIN THE
FIGHT FLOCKED TO RECRUITMENT
CENTERS.
>> ( translated ): I HAVE
VOLUNTEERED TO JOIN THE IRAQI
ARMY TO CRUSH THE HEADS OF THE
I-S-I-L FIGHTERS AND THOSE WHO
ALLIED WITH THEM.
>> Ifill: OFFICIALS SAID IN THE
PAST WEEK ALONE, OVER TWO
MILLION IRAQIS HAVE VOLUNTEERED
TO TAKE UP ARMS AGAINST THE
INSURGENCY.
RAISING FEARS THAT THE VIOLENCE
GRIPPING THE COUNTRY COULD
DETERIORATE EVEN FURTHER.
SO CAN IRAQI PRIME MINISTER
MALIKI UNITE HIS COUNTRY?
OR WILL IT TAKE ANOTHER LEADER?
FEISAL ISTRABADI WAS IRAQ'S
DEPUTY AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED
NATIONS FROM 2004 TO 2007.
HE'S NOW A PROFESSOR OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW AND DIPLOMACY
AT INDIANA UNIVERSITY.
ABBAS KADHIM WAS BORN AND RAISED
IN IRAQ AND IS NOW A SENIOR
FOREIGN POLICY FELLOW AT JOHNS
HOPKIN UNIVERSITY'S SCHOOL OF
ADVANCED INTERNATIONAL STUDIES.
AND CHARLES DUELFER SERVED AS A
UNITED NATIONS WEAPONS INSPECTOR
IN IRAQ, LEADING THE EFFORT TO
FIND WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
AFTER THE 2003 U.S. INVASION.
WELCOME TO YOU ALL.
FEISAL ISTRABADI, UNTIL A FEW
YEARS AGO, IRAQ'S POLITICS
SEEMED TO BE RELATIVELY STABLE.
WHAT HAS HAPPENED IN WHAT SEEMS
TO BE SUCH A SHORT TIME?
>> I THINK OVER THE LAST TWO
YEARS THE PRIME MINISTER HAS
INCREASINGLY COME TO CONFRONT
SOME OF THE OTHER PARTNERS THAT
HE HAS IN THE COALITION.
HE HAS BEGUN IN THE LAST FEW
MONTHS TO CONFRONT THE IRAQ
MILITARILY IN A VARIETY OF WAYS,
THE SUNNI, AND THE KURDISH
REGION IN IRAQ ECONOMICALLY AND
I THINK THIS HAS CAUSED MANY OF
HIS COALITION PARTNERS TO LOOK
UPON HIM WITH SOME QUESTION
HARKS.
>> Ifill: ARE THE QUESTION
MARKS FROM WITHIN OR WITHOUT?
THAT IS TO SAY JUST COALITION
PARTNERS LOOKING AT HIM ASKANCE
OR ALSO FELLOW IRAQIS?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THEY'RE ALL
FELLOW IRAQIS.
>> Ifill: RIGHT.
BUT, CLEARLY, ALL OF THESE
PARTIES THAT ARE ASKING THE
QUESTIONS ARE IN GOVERNMENT, OR
PART OF THE GOVERNMENT.
SO I THINK HE HAS LOST THE
ABILITY TO BE AN EFFECTIVE
INTERLOCK TEAR WITH TWO OF THE
MAJOR GROUPS IN THE COUNTRY, THE
SUNNI AND KURDS.
>> Ifill: I THINK IT WAS
TALKING ABOUT COALITION OUTSIDE
OF IRAQ.
IS NOURI AL-MALIKI TO BLAME FOR
THE SET OF CIRCUMSTANCES?
>> HE IS PART OF THE ENTIRE
IRAQI POLITICAL SYSTEM AND
WORKED WITH MANY OTHERS.
MALIKI ISN'T THE ONLY DECISION
MAKER IN IRAQ, IT'S A COALITION
FROM ALL PARTS OF THE COUNTRY,
AND THE ENTIRE POLITICAL RULING
CLASS HAS FAILED IRAQ,
DEFINITELY, SO BLAMING MALIKI
ALONE WOULD BE UNFAIR, I THINK.
THERE ARE TWO THINGS MAYBE I
COULD SAY QUICKLY ABOUT PLEEKY.
ONE IS HE IS THE MOST POPULAR
POLITICIAN AS THE LAST ELECTIONS
SHOWED.
HE OUTPERFORMED THE TRIBAL 3 TO
1 IN THE NUMBER OF SEATS TAKEN
AND HE HIMSELF GOT 721,000 VOTES
ALONE IN BAGHDAD.
THE SECOND WHICH HAS TO DO WITH
THE DEBATE WHICH IS GOING ON IN
WASHINGTON, D.C. IS THIS IDEA
THAT MALIKI HAS TO GO.
YOU KNOW, THIS IS THE WORST
THING THAT CAN BE DONE TO A
COUNTRY THAT IS DEMOCRATIZING,
TO HAVE PEOPLE IN ANY OTHER
PLACE TO CALL ON SOMEONE TO
RESIGN OR TO PICK KINGS OR TO
OVERTHROW KINGS.
I THINK THE PRESIDENT IN HIS
STATEMENT TODAY GOT IT RIGHT
WHEN HE SAID WE ARE NOT IN THE
BUSINESS OF CHOOSING OR PICKING
IRAQI LEADERS.
THIS IS THE WAY IT SHOULD BE
DONE IF MALIKI IS OVERTHROWN
FROM THE PRESSURE OF OUTSIDE
FORCES, THIS WILL HAVE GRAVE
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE PROSPECTS
OF DEMOCRACY INRY.
>> Ifill: CHARLES DUELFER, AS
YOU LOOK AT THIS SHAKEDOWN, THIS
SHAKE OUT, DO YOU THINK THAT
al-MALIKI HAS DONE ENOUGH TO
AVOID THIS IMPASSE?
>> THE SHORT ANSWER IS NO, BUT
THE PROBLEM REALLY WAS BORN IN
THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF THE
INVASION IN 2003.
I THINK EVERYONE ACKNOWLEDGES
NOW MISTAKES IN TERMS OF NOT
BEING INCLUSIVE ENOUGH OF THE
SUNNI GROUPS, SOME OF THEM
FORMER BAATHISTS AND FORMER
ARMY, AND THROUGHOUT THE
SUCCEEDING TEN YEARS, THEY HAVE
BEEN LOOK FOR SOME SIGNAL THEY
WILL HAVE A NEW IRAQ.
FOR A WHILE, THEY SEEMED TO HAVE
BEEN DRUG INTO THE AWAKENING
PERIOD GENERAL PETRAEUS WAS
TAKING CREDIT FOR, BUT MALIKI
HAS GOTTEN LESS INSTEAD OF MORE
INCLUSIVE.
YES, AS OBAMA SAID, WE MUST BE
DRIVEN BY THE ELECTIONS, BUT
WHEN THE END RESULTS ARE TO BE
EXCLUDE A VERY IMPORTANT
POPULATION AND THAT UPONLATION
BY DOING NOTHING CAN ENCOURAGE
THE EVIL, THEN WE HAVE A PROBLEM
THAT MUST BE ADDRESSED.
THEY NEED A STRONG MESSAGE AND I
'T THEY'RE GETTING IT.
>> Reporter: IS IT ABOUT
EXCLUDING SUNNIS IN GENERAL OR
FORM BAATHESTS IN GENERAL?
>> I THINK THERE'S A QUESTION
AND OBVIOUSLY GRADATIONS, BUT
WHAT THEY NEED TO HEAR NOW IS
THEY NEED TO HEAR A GOOD,
POSITIVE ALTERNATIVE TO EITHER
DOING NOTHING OR ACTIVELY
SUPPORTING I.S.I.L.
I DON'T THINK THAT MESSAGE CAME
ACROSS IN THE PRESIDENT'S WORDS
TONIGHT.
HE WAS TOO NUANCED.
HE NEEDS TO BE VERY, VERY CLEAR.
IF SECRETARY KERRY GOES TO THE
REGION, AS HAS BEEN PREDICTED,
HE MAY SEE MALIKI.
IF HE SEES MALIKI BUT DOESN'T
SEE SUNNIS OR SOME
REPRESENTATIVES OF SUNNIS,
THEY'RE GOING TO GET EXACTLY THE
WRONG MESSAGE.
THIS IS A CRITICAL TIME.
THEY'VE GOT TO ACT QUICKLY.
>> Ifill: FEISAL ISTRABADI,
HOW IMPORTANT IS IT FOR THE U.S.
TO BE MORE POINTED IN ITS
STATEMENTS ABOUT WHAT IT IS AND
IS NOT WILLING TO DO?
>> I THINK IT HAS TO BE VERY
CAREFUL.
I'M SORRY IF I MNDERSTOOD
YOUR QUESTION EARLIER, BUT IT
HAS TO BE CAREFUL IN HOW IT
DEALS PUBLICLY.
DIPLOMACY OUGHT TO OCCUR BEHIND
THE SCREENINGS AND NOT IN FRONT
OF THE CAMERAS.
THE AMBASSADOR OF THE UNITED
STATES CANNOT BE SEEN FORCING
THE HANDS OF PLAYERS IN BAGHDAD
BUT IT CAN MAKE ITS OWN
INTERESTS CLEAR IN BAGHDAD BLIND
THE SCENES AND I THINK IT'S
CLEAR THE CURRENT LEADERSHIP OF
IRAQ SIMPLE DOES NOT HAVE A
VISION.
I AGREE ALL POLITICAL PARTIES
AND POLITICIANS IN IRAQ HAVE A
SHARE IN THE BLAME IN WHERE AND
HOW WE GOT HERE BUT THAT'S NOT
WHAT WE'RE DISCUSSING, THE
QUESTION IS HOW DO WE GET OUT OF
THE HOLE WE'RE IN, AND I THINK
ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS WE NEED
TO DO IS STOP DIGGING AND FIND A
NEW LEADERSHIP.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU ABOUT
THAT.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN HAS BEEN
INVOLVED IN TALKING TO THE
CURRENT LEADERSHIP AND BEING
THAT BROKER AND NOW JOHN KERRY
IS ON THE WAY TO THE REGION.
WAS THERE A BREAKDOWN IN THE
RELATIONSHIP THAT ALLOWED US TO
GET TO THE PLACE WHERE THERE
SEEMS TO BE SUCH DISTRUST?
>> WELL, I THINK THE UNITED
STATES, ONCE IT WITHDREW, TOOK
THE POSITION THAT THE IRAQIS ARE
NOW CHARGE, AND I THINK THAT
THAT MAY HAVE BEEN APPROPRIATE.
I THINK IT'S APPROPRIATE NOW FOR
THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ENGAGE
IN IRAQ.
I'M VERY PLEASED TO HEAR HE'S
GOING TO IRAQ.
I AGREE WITH MR. DUELFER HE
NEEDS TO MEET WITH ALL PARTIES
TO GET A SENSE OF WHERE THEY ALL
STAND.
I WILL SAY IF MALIKI'S LIST GOT
ONE-THIRD OF THE SEATS, THAT
MEANS TWO-THIRDS OF IRAQIS
DIDN'T VOTE FOR HIS LIST AND I
THINK THAT, TOO, OUGHT TO BE
SOMETHING TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT, IN
ANY PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM A LIST
THAT GETS ONE-THIRD WHICH IS
UNWILLING TO MEET BASIC DEMANDS
OF OTHER PARTIES MIGHT WELL FIND
ITSELF IN OPPOSITION.
>> Ifill: MALIKI OR NO MALIKI,
WHAT ARE THE CHANCE OF A UNIT
GOVERNMENT THAT HAS BEEN TALKED
ABOUT AT LEAST?
>> WELL, IT IS A MATTER FOR
OTHERS TO WORK TOGETHER, TO WORK
FOR MALIKI.
IF THEY ARE DRIVING A HARD
BARGAIN, THAT MALIKI HAS TO BE
COMPLETELY OUT OF THE PICTURE, I
DON'T SEE ANY POSSIBILITY FOR
IGNORING THE TOP AND ESPECIALLY
WITH THE MARGIN THAT TWO-THIRDS
OF IRAQIS DIDN'T VOTE FOR THE
STATE OF THE LAW, BUT ALSO THEY
DID NOT VOTE FOR ONE ENTITY THAT
HAD THE TWO-THIRDS.
THEIR VOTE WAS CAPTURED AND, YOU
KNOW, IF IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR
SOMEONE WHO GOT 95 SEATS TO FORN
HARDER, MORE IMPOSSIBLE FOR
SOMEONE WHO GOT 30 SEATS.
SO PERSPECTIVE AND NUMBERS IS
IMPORTANT.
>> Ifill: YOU'RE SAYING THERE
IS NOT NECESSARILY A CLEAR
ALTERNATIVE?
>> YES, THE LEADERS WHO ARE
GOING TO TAKE OVER FOR MALIKI,
WE DON'T SEE THEM IN THE CRISIS
AND THE IRAQIS ARE HIGHLY
DISAPPOINTED BY THEIR
PERFORMANCE, AND THAT IS THE BIG
PROBLEM, THERE IS NO CLEAR
ALTERNATIVE TO MALIKI RIGHT NOW
AND, IF ANYTHING, THIS CRISIS
HAS DRIVEN HIS POPULARITY EVEN
HIGHMO IRAQI PEOPLE.
YOU, HE IS UNPOPULAR IN
WASHINGTON, MAYBE UNPOPULAR IN
CERTAIN SUNNI AREAS, AND NOW
THAT HE'S ARMED WITH A FATWA, A
RELIGIOUS EDICT FROM THE TOP, I
DON'T SEE ANY WAY OF TAKING HIM
OUT.
SO ANYONE WHO WANTS TO FORM A
UNITY GOVERNMENT, HE HAS TO PUT
A SPECIAL PLACE FOR MALIKI.
>> Ifill: FINAL CHOTT, CHARLES
DUELFER -- FINAL THOUGHT,
CHARLES DUELFER, WHAT'S THE BEST
POSSIBLE OUTCOME?
>> AN AGREEMENT WHERE THERE'S
PARTIES IN IRAQ WHO SAY WE'RE
GOING TO DIVIDE POWER WITH
SERIOUS MINISTRIES GOING TO
SUNNI GROUPS, WITH PERHAPS A
RECONSIDERATION OF THE
HYDROCARBON LAW WHERE OIL CAN BE
DIVIDED AND I DON'T SEE HOW THAT
HAPPENS IF MALIKI CLINGS TO
POWER.
WE'RE ASKING MALIKI, AT A TIME
IN CRISIS, TO BE INCLUSIVE AND
THAT'S THE OPPOSITE OF WHAT YOU
WOULD NORMALLY DO.
CHARLES DUELFER, ABBAS KADHIM,
POLICFLEECE FLEECE, THANKFEISAL.
THANK YOU ALL.
>> Woodruff: THE NATIONAL
COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION
HAS LONG DEFENDED THE IDEA OF
THE AMATEUR STUDENT-ATHLETE, BUT
THAT CONCEPT IS FACING ITS
TOUGHEST TRIAL YET.
IN FACT, IT'S LITERALLY A CLASS-
ACTION TRIAL UNDERWAY IN A
FEDERAL DISTRICT COURT IN
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA.
THE LAWSUIT CONTENDS THE
N.C.A.A. SHOULD PERMIT FORMER
AND CURRENT COLLEGE BASKETBALL
AND FOOTBALL PLAYERS TO PROFIT
FROM THE USE OF THEIR NAMES,
LIKENESS AND IMAGES IN
TELEVISION BROADCASTS, VIDEO
GAMES AND OTHER MEDIA.
THE CASE'S ORIGINS GO BACK TO A
LAWSUIT FIRST BROUGHT BY FORMER
U.C.L.A. BASKETBALL PLAYER ED
O'BANNON AFTER HE SAW HIS
LIKENESS IN A VIDEO GAME.
IT'S EVOLVED INTO A MUCH BIGGER
SUIT AGAINST THE N.C.A.A., WITH
POTENTIALLY BIGGER IMPLICATIONS.
TODAY, N.C.A.A. PRESIDENT, MARK
EMMERT, TOOK THE STAND.
WE'RE JOINED BY MICHAEL McCANN,
HE IS DIRECTOR OF THE SPORTS AND
ENTERTAINMENT LAW INSTITUTE AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
>> Ifill: MICHAEL McCANN,
WELCOME BACK TO THE
"NEWSHOUR".
TELL US, AT ITS CORE, WHAT IS
THIS CASE ABOUT?
>> AT ITS CORE, THE ED O'BANNON
CASE IS ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT
DIVISION 1 BASKETBALL PLAYERS,
STUDENTS AT THE HIGHEST LEVEL,
SHOULD BE ABLE TO NEGOTIATE FOR
THEIR NAIRNLINGS IMAGE AND
LIKENESS, WHEN THEY'RE ON
TELEVISION, WHEN THEY'RE IN
ARCHIVAL VIDEO, WHEN THEY'RE ON
WEB VIDEO, WHEN THEY'RE IN VIDEO
GAMES, WHEN THEY'RE SOMEHOW
RELATED TO APPAREL OR TRADING
CARDS, ANYTHING USING THEIR
NAME, IMAGE AND LIKENESS,
THEY'RE ARGUING THEY SHOULD BE
ABLE TO NEGOTIATE MONEY FOR
THAT, SOME TYPE OF COMPENSATION.
UNDER NCAA RULES, THEY ARE
BARRED FROM DOING SO.
THE NCAA HAS A SYSTEM CALLED
AMATEURISM WHICH FOCUSES ON A
SPHARK DISTINCTION BETWEEN
PROFESSIONAL AND AMATEURO'BANNON
IS FLAWED AND IT'S IN VIOLATION
OF ANTITRUST LAW AND THE BASIC
ANTITRUST THEORY IS THAT THE
NCAA AND MEMBERS HAVE
PURPORTEDLY JOINED HANS SO
NCAA CONFERENCES, INDIVIDUAL
COLLEGES TO PREVENT THEM FROM
NEGOTIATING AND THAT'S AN
ANTI-COMPETITIVE MARKET AND THEY
SHOULD BE ABLE TO NEGOTIATE AND
THEY HOPE THAT JUDGE WILKIN WILL
ISSUE AN INJUNCTION ALLOWING
THEM TO DO SO.
>> Ifill: SO THEY'RE ARGUING
THE ANTI-TRUST POSITION IS THEIR
WAY IN IN THIS ARGUMENT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT, THEIR WAY IN IS
THE ANTI-TRUST ARGUMENT.
THE IDEA THERE'S A CARTEL, A
CONSPIRACY.
OTHERS MAKING MONEY OFF THEIR
NAME, IMAGE AND LIKENESS AND
DENYING THEM THE OPPORTUNITY TO
EVEN NEGOTIATE.
THE ATHLETES HAVE SAID, LOOK,
WE'RE NOT ASKING FOR MILLIONS,
WE JUST WANT TO HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO NEGOTIATE.
NOW, THE NCAA, IN FAIRNESS TO
THE NCAA, HAS A NUMBER OF
ARGUMENTS, INCLUDING THE FACT
THAT THEY HAVE HAD THIS
INSTITUTION FOR YEARS AND THEY
BELIEVE COLLEGE SPORTS WOULD BE
HARMED IF STUDENT ATHLETES WERE
QUASI PROFESSIONAL, AS THE
DESCRIBE THEM.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO THEY ARGUE
THEY WOULD BE HARMED?
>> THE NCAA BELIEVE SOME SCHOOLS
WOULD CUT THEIR SPORTS PROGRAMS,
IF STUDENT ATHLETES,
SPECIFICALLY MEN'S BASKETBALL
TO NEGOTIATE FOR THEIR NAME,LE
EMAND LIKENESS, SOME OF THAT
MONEY WOULD HAVE GONE TO THEIR
COLLEGES WILL NOW GO TO THEM, SO
THAT COULD REQUIRE SCHOOLS TO
LOSE SOME MONEY AND IT COULD BE
MORE EXPENSIVE TO HAVE SPORTS,
SO THE FEAR IS THAT, IF THIS H
SYSTEM COMES ABOUT, SOME SCHOOLS
WILL CUT THEIR SPORTS PROGRAMS
OR MORE LIKELY CUT SOME ASPECTS
OF THEIR SPORTS PROGRAMS, AND
THERE'S ANOTHER AREA OF LAW WE
KNOW IS CALLED TITLE 9 THAT
WOULD PREVENT SCHOOLS FROM
CUTTING WOMEN'S TEAMS SO THE
WOMEN'S TEAMS WOULD REMAIN BUT
THE MEN'S TEAMS THAT ARE GOLF,
TENNIS, MAYBE BASEBALL,
LaCROSSE, OTHER SPORTS NOT
TYPICALLY GENERATING REVENUE
WOULD BE AXED FROM THE PROGRAM
AND THE NCAA BELIEVES THAT ONCE
YOU ALLOW STUDENT ATHLETES TO BE
ESSENTIALLY PROFESSIONALS, THE
O'BANNON TEAM WOULDN'T SAY THAT
WAS UNTRUE, BUT LET'S GO WITH
THAT, BUT FANS WOULD BECOME LESS
INTERESTED IN COLLEGE SPORTS,
LESS MONEY WOULD GO INTO IT AND
AS A RESULT SCHOOLS WOULD BE
MORE INCLINED TO DOWNSIZE THE
SPORTS' PROGRAM SO THAT'S THE
CENTRAL THESIS.
>> Woodruff: HOW DOES O'BANNON
AND HIMSELF AND THE PEOPLE
BRINGING THIS SUIT WHO REPRESENT
HIS POINT OF VIEW, HOW DO THEY
COUNTER THAT ARGUMENT?
>> WELL, PART OF THE ARGUMENT,
JUDY, IS THEY ARGUE THAT'S NOT
TRUE, THAT COLLEGE SPORTS FANS
WOULD STILL LIKE SPORTS IN
COLLEGE EVEN IF STUDENT ATHLETES
WERE ABLE TO NEGOTIATE FOR THEIR
NAME, IMAGE AND LIKENESS AND
THEY WOULD LIKELY DO SO NOT
INDIVIDUALLY BUT THROUGH A TRADE
ASSOCIATION.
SO THE IDEA THERE WOULD BE
SPORTS AGENTS ON CAMPUS
NEGOTIATING CONTRACTS, THAT
COULD BE TRUE FOR SOME OF THE
ELITE COLLEGE ATHLETES, BUT IT'S
UNLIKELY TO BE TRUE, AT LEAST
O'BANNON ARGUES, FOR THE
MAINSTREAM BASKETBALL AND
FOOTBALL PLAYER.
SO THEY BELIEVE THAT THE PARADE
OF TECIALS THAT MIGHTO --
TESHLES THAT MIGHT OCCUR REALLY
ISN'T TRUE AND HAVE ARGUED
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER IT'S TRUE
OR NOT THAT DOESN'T MEAN
ANTI-TRUST LAW IS VIOLATED BY
THE SYSTEM, THAT A SYSTEM WHERE
THEY'RE ALLOWED TO NEGOTIATE
BECAUSE OF A "CONSPIRACY" OR
"CARTEL."
THAT'S ILLEGAL, REGARDLESS OF
THE EFFECT IT WOULD HAVE ON
COLLEGE SPORTS.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, WHATEVER
THE JUDGE RULES, THIS IS AN
ARGUMENT THAT GOES ON, AND THERE
ARE OTHER EFFORTS TO CHANGE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEENLLEGE
ATHLETES AND THE SPORTS THEY
PLAY, ARE THERE NOT?
>> YEAH, THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT,
JUDY.
SO, AS A STARTING POINT, LET'S
SAY O'BANNON WINS, THERE WILL BE
AN APPEAL.
AN APPEAL WOULD LIKELY TAKE
YEARS, WOULD HAVE TO GO TO THE
U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 9t
9th CIRCUIT AND POTENTIALLY
THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT,
SO THERE WON'T BE RESOLUTION FOR
SOME TIME.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER LITIGATIONS
GOING ON.
THERE'S AN ARGUMENT BY CAIN
COULTER, A FOOTBALL PLAYER AT
NORTHWEST UNIVERSITY WHO
BELIEVES COLLEGE FOOTBALL
PLAYERS WITH EMPLOYEES AND
SHOULD BE ABLE TO UNIONIZE,
THAT'S BEFORE THE NATIONAL LABOR
RELATIONNATIONAL LABORRELATIONS.
THE NCAA IS ATTACKED WITH A
TO RUN T TABLE TO KEEP IT THE
WAY IT IS AND THAT SEEMS
UNLIKELY TO HAPPEN.
>> Woodruff: WE WILL CONTINUE
TO WATCH THIS TRIAL UNDERWAY IN
CALIFORNIA.
FOR TODAY, MICHAEL McCANN, WE
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Ifill: THE COLLEGE TOWN OF
MADISON, WISCONSIN IS NOT THE
SORT OF PLACE THAT LEAPS TO MIND
WHEN IT COMES TO THE DISCUSSION
OF RACIAL DISPARITIES.
BUT THE GAP BETWEEN BLACK AND
WHITE RESIDENTS IN MADISON'S
DANE COUNTY, ARE, ACCORDING TO
RECENT REPORTS, MORE EXTREME
THAN MOST OTHER JURISDICTIONS IN
THE NATION.
NOW, THERE'S A NEW EFFORT TO
FIND WAYS TO BRIDGE THAT GAP.
HARI SREENIVASAN REPORTS.
>> DOG-GONE IT, THIS IS OUR
COMMUNITY, AND WE'RE NOT GOING
TO LET IT GO TO HELL IN A HAND
BASKET, SO THANK YOU FOR COMING.
>> Reporter: AT THE FOUNTAIN OF
LIFE COVENANT CHURCH IN MADISON
WISCONSIN, THE REVEREND ALEX GEE
RECENTLY ADDRESSED HUNDREDS OF
RESIDENTS ABOUT A CAMPAIGN HE
CALLS, JUSTIFIED ANGER.
>> DON'T LET MY ANGER, OR OUR
ANGER FRUSTRATE YOU OR CAUSE YOU
FEAR, OR CONSTERNATION.
>> Reporter: THE REVEREND IS
ANGRY ABOUT STATISTICS THAT SHOW
SIGNIFICANT GAPS BETWEEN
WISCONSIN'S WHITE AND BLACK
POPULATIONS.
>> WE ARE LIVING IN A WORLD OF
TURMOIL, IT'S TOUGH, RACIAL
DISPARITY IS AWFUL.
WE ARE GROUND ZERO FOR SO MANY
ISSUES, PARTICULARLY THOSE
CONCERNING AFRICAN AMERICAN MEN.
>> 650 PEOPLE POURED IN.
THEY FILLED THE PLACE, THERE WAS
STANDING ROOM ONLY, WE HAD 150
IN THE FOYER.
>> Reporter: IN A REPORT THAT
DETAILED NATIONWIDE RACIAL
DISPARITIES, THE ANNIE E. CASEY
FOUNDATION FOUND WISCONSIN HAD
THE WORST RANKINGS FOR AFRICAN
AMERICAN CHILDREN IN THE
COUNTRY.
THE REPORT, WHICH LOOKED AT KEY
INDICATORS LIKE EDUCATION,
FAMILY INCOME, HEALTH, AND HOME
STABILITY.
>> PEOPLE DON'T COME TO MADISON
SO THEIR KIDS CAN FAIL IN
SCHOOL.
PEOPLE DON'T COME TO MADISON SO
THEIR KIDS CAN ROT IN A PRISON
CELL.
DREAMERS COME TO MADISON AND
WHEN THEY FEEL EXCLUDED FROM THE
DREAM THEY BECOME NIGHTMARES!
>> Reporter: GEE SAYS THE
NATIONAL SPOTLIGHT ON
WISCONSIN'S RACIAL DISCONNECT
HIT A NERVE.
>> I DID THIS SAME THING THIRTY
YEARS AGO, THIS SAME ISSUE AND
I'M SICK AND TIRED OF THIS.
>> IT REFLECTS ON OUR COMMUNITY
IN A VERY DEEP WAY.
WHAT ARE OUR VALUES, DO WE
BELIEVE THAT THIS IS THE WAY
THERE SHOULD BE ALMOST THESE TWO
CITIES CO-EXISTING, OR TWO
COUNTIES CO-EXISTING IN TERMS OF
THE EXPERIENCE THAT PEOPLE HAVE
HERE IN MADISON AND DANE COUNTY.
>> Reporter: THE REASONS THAT
CAUSE THESE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
WHITE AND BLACK CHILDREN START
YOUNG, EVEN BEFORE SCHOOL.
>> DO YOU WANT TO READ THAT WITH
MOMMA?
>> Reporter: TO GET KIDS CAUGHT
UP BEFORE ENTERING SCHOOL, DANE
COUNTY OFFICIALS BEGAN SENDING
SOCIAL WORKERS TO WORK WITH
PARENTS FROM UNDER-SD
COMMUNITIES.
KATIE SNOW IS THE PROGRAM
SUPERVISOR.
>> THE BRAIN IS DEVELOPING VERY
RAPIDLY IN THE FIRST THREE YEARS
OF LIFE, AND PARTICULARLY THAT
FIRST YEAR.
>> Reporter: JOE PARISI,
EXECUTIVE FOR DANE COUNTY, SAYS
THE PROGRAM IS SPECIFICALLY
DESIGNED TO CLOSE THE
EDUCATIONAL GAP.
>> WE ENGAGE THE PARENTS AND THE
KIDS IN OPPORTUNITIES TO LEARN
HOW TO INTERACT WITH EACH OTHER
IN THE MOST PRODUCTIVE WAY, AND
AIMED AT HELPING THOSE KIDS
ACHIEVE THE EDUCATIONAL AND
DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES
NECESSARY TO ENTER FOUR YEAR OLD
KINDERGARTEN AT THE SAME LEVEL
AS THE MAJORITY OF THE KIDS
COMING IN.
>> Reporter: DIONE BLOUIN SAYS
WORKING WITH SNOW HAS HELPED HER
IMPROVE HER DAUGHTER'S LANGUAGE
AND COMPREHENSION.
>> I LIKE BEING A YOUNG MOM, YOU
JUST FEEL LIKE YOU'RE GOING
WRONG WITH A LOT OF THINGS, AND
YOU NEED THAT SUPPORT TO LET YOU
KNOW YOU'RE DOING GOOD.
>> Reporter: BY THE TIME BABIES
LIKE DIONE'S ARE IN MIDDLE
SCHOOL, THE GAPS ARE
SIGNIFICANT.
IN WISCONSIN MIDDLE SCHOOLS,
WHITE CHILDREN ARE SIX TIMES
MORE LIKELY TO BE PROFICIENT IN
8TH GRADE MATH THAN BLACK
STUDENTS.
READING PROFICIENCIES FOR
AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDENTS ARE
FOUR TIMES WORSE.
PRINCIPAL TREMAYNE CLARDY FROM
SENNETT MIDDLE SCHOOL WELCOMES
ATTENTION TO THE PROBLEM.
>> THERE ARE DEFINITELY
DISPARITIES WE HAVE TO ADDRESS
AND ARE ADDRESSING.
>> Reporter: CLARDY, WHO WROTE
HIS DOCTORAL DISSERTATION ON
RACIAL DISPARITIES, SAYS
EDUCATORS NEED TO MAKE LEARNING
MORE PERSONAL AND PURPOSEFUL.
>> WHEN A STUDENT IDENTIFIES A
PURPOSE FOR BEING IN THE
CLASSROOM, AND YOU ENHANCE THAT
WITH CULTURALLY RELEVANT
CURRICULUM, THEN THAT'S WHEN THE
LIGHT COMES ON, AND THAT'S WHEN
EDUCATION TRULY HAPPENS.
>> Reporter: HE LINKS MUCH OF
THE RACIAL DIVIDE TO POVERTY,
EDUCATION, AND EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES.
>> THE GAP IS PRETTY STRIKING.
FOR AFRICAN-AMERICANS IT'S 25%
UNEMPLOYMENT HERE IN DANE
COUNTY, FOR WHITES IT'S 4.8%
UNEMPLOYMENT, SO THAT'S PRETTY
STARK.
>> Reporter: THOSE UNEMPLOYMENT
NUMBERS ARE PARTICULARLY
TROUBLING AT A TIME WHEN
MADISON'S CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
IS EXPERIENCING A LABOR
SHORTAGE.
SO THE URBAN LEAGUE PARTNERED
WITH DANE COUNTY OFFICIALS TO
TRAIN MINORITIES FOR TRADE
INDUSTRY JOBS.
THEY HELPED WALTER KONYA, WHO
HAD TROUBLE FINDING WORK AFTER
HIGH SCHOOL.
>> I BELIEVE THAT THE ODDS ARE
STACKED AGAINST YOU AS A
MINORITY, YOU KNOW, BUT PROGRAMS
LIKE THIS DO HELP EVEN THE ODDS
IN A GREAT WAY.
>> Reporter: WHAT MADISON IS
FACING IS NOT UNLIKE RACIAL
DISPARITIES SEEN ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
THE ANNIE E. CASEY REPORT CALLED
THE IMBALANCE BETWEEN AFRICAN-
AMERICAN AND WHITE CHILDREN
ACHIEVEMENT A NATIONAL CRISIS.
COMMUNITY LEADERS SEE IT AS A
CALL TO ACTION.
>> IF WE DON'T CAPTURE IT NOW,
IF WE DON'T ADDRESS IT NOW, THEN
I'M REALLY CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT
MADISON WILL BECOME IN THE NEXT
DECADE.
>> Reporter: SO WHAT IS THE
SOLUTION FOR MADISON?
>> I THINK WHAT'S GOING TO BE
DIFFERENT IS THE INDIGENOUS
VOICE.
WE'RE RARELY AT THE TABLE,
RARELY ASKED WHAT WE THINK, AND
THAT DOESN'T DIGNIFY US.
SO WE'RE THE TOPIC OF EVERY
DISCUSSION, WE'RE THE SUBJECT OF
EVERY REPORT, AND WE DON'T GET
TO INTERJECT, WE DON'T GET TO
SUBMIT, WE DON'T GET TO SAY
ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: NOBEL WRAY SAYS
THAT MAY BE CHANGING.
>> THERE SEEMS TO BE A MOVEMENT.
THERE'S COMMUNITY LEADERS, THERE
ARE NON-PROFITS INVOLVED, THERE
ARE GRASSROOTS PEOPLE THAT ARE
TALKING ABOUT THIS.
ALL OF THE OTHER INITIATIVES
WERE REALLY LED BY GOVERNMENT,
AND THAT HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS, BECAUSE WE CAN NEVER
SUSTAIN THE EFFORT.
POLITICALLY, WHEN WE GET
TURNOVER, IT'S NOT THOUGHT ABOUT
ANYMORE.
>> WE HAVE THE WEAR WITH ALL AND
THE GOODS, THE QUESTION IS DO WE
HAVE THE WILL TO CHANGE THIS ON
OUR WATCH?
>> Reporter: BOTH REVEREND GEE
AND NOBLE WRAY ARE OPTIMISTIC
THAT ADDRESSING THE THORNY ISSUE
OF RACIAL DISPARITY HERE IN
WISCONSIN COULD BECOME A
TEMPLATE FOR OTHER COMMUNITIES
AROUND THE COUNTRY
>> Woodruff: A COALITION OF
GROUPS OPPOSING SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE RALLIED IN WASHINGTON
TODAY OUTSIDE THE U.S. CAPITOL,
MARCHING TO THE SUPREME COURT IN
SUPPORT OF MARRIAGE BETWEEN ONE
MAN AND ONE WOMAN.
THIS COMES JUST DAYS AFTER THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED
ITS INTENT TO BAN FEDERAL
CONTRACTORS FROM DISCRIMINATING
ON THE BASIS OF SEXUAL
ORIENTATION OR GENDER IDENTITY.
AND AS POLLS SHOW THE TIDE OF
PUBLIC OPINION CHANGING RAPIDLY.
TO DISCUSS HOW THE FIGHT OVER
GAY RIGHTS IS PLAYING OUT BOTH
IN WASHINGTON AND ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
WE ARE JOINED BY EDWARD-ISAAC
DOVERE, SENIOR WHITE HOUSE
REPORTER FOR "POLITICO."
AND DAVID CRARY, WHO COVERS
NATIONAL SOCIAL ISSUES FOR THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS.
S WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
>> GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: SO LET ME START
WITH YOU, EDWARD-ISAAC DOVERE.
THIS ORDER OF THE WHITE HOUSE
AFFECTING FEDERAL CONTRACTORS,
WHAT IS IT AND WHO'S AFFECTED BY
IT?
>> THE WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCED THE
PRESIDENT WILL SIGN THIS
EXECUTIVE ORDER.
THEY HAVEN'T ANNOUNCED WHAT'S IN
IT EXACTLYET, YUT IT WILL BAN
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST LGBT
PEOPLE WORKING FOR GOVERNMENT
CONTRACTORS.
THERE ARE QUESTIONS ABOUT SOME
OF THE MINUTIA THAT WILL BE IN
IT ESPECIALLY WHAT KIND OF
RELIGIOUS EXEMPTION MIGHT BE IN
THERE BUT IT SEEMS LIKE IT IS
GOING FORWARD AND THE PRESIDENT
WILL SIGN IT SOON.
>> Woodruff: DAVID CRARY,
WHAT'S YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF WHY
THE ADMINISTRATION IS DOING THIS
NOW?
>> WELL, WHEN PRESIDENT OBAMA
TOOK OFFICE, THE GAY RIGHTS
MOVEMENT HAD A PRETTY LONG WISH
LIST OF THINGS THEY HOPED THIS
LIBERAL PRESIDENT WOULD DO AND
HE'S CHECKED OFF ALL THE OTHER
ITEMS ON THIS LIST OF GAYS IN
THE MILITARY SERVING OPENLY,
SEVERAL OTHER THINGS AND SRT
FOR GAY MARRIAGE.
THIS IS THE LAST BIG ITEM ON THE
LIST AND I THINK THERE'S A SENSE
OF RELIEF AND DELIGHT BY GAY
ACTIVISTS AND PROBABLY A SENSE
OF RELIEF AT THE WHITE HOUSE
THAT THEY FINALLY FINISHED THIS
LIST AND CAN SORT OF NOW
CELEBRATE TOGETHER.
>> Woodruff: IS THAT HOW YOU
SEE IT, EDWARD-ISAAC DOVERE?
>> THIS WAS A PROMISE THE
PRESIDENT MADE IN 2008.
HE DIDN'T DO ANYTHING ON IT IN
THE FIRST TERM, WAS DOING OTHER
THINGS GAY ADVOCATES WERE HAPPY
ABOUT.
IN SPRING 2012 WHEN PREPARING
FOR REELECTION, HIS ADVISORS
TOLD GUY ACTIVISTS THAT THEY
SHOULDN'T EXPECT IT TO HAPPEN
TILL AFTER THE ELECTION.
THIS WAS THE LAST BIG THING.
SOME GAY ACTIVISTS PUT IT TO ME
AS THE THIRD LEG OF THE STOOL
WITH REPEALING DON'T ASK DON'T
TELL AND COMING OUT IN FAVOR OF
GAY MARRIAGE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF OTHER THINGS
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS TO BE
TOUTING WHEN IT COMES TO GAY
RIGHTS BUT THOSE ARE THE THREE
BIG ITEMS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT'S HAPPENED
IN TERMS OF PUBLIC ATTITUDES
ABOUT SAME-SEX MARRIAGE, AND WE
HAVE GRAPHICS TO SHOW THE
VIEWERS, IS REMARKABLE JUST IN
THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
YOU'VE SEEN A COMPLETE SHIFT IN
THE PERCENTAGE OF AMERICANS WHO
OPPOSE SAME-SEX MARRIAGE AND
THOSE WHO SUPPORT IT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, AND IT'S ACROSS
A LOT OF DIFFERENT DEMOGRAPHIC
SECTORS WHICH IS INTERESTING.
YOUNG PEOPLE ARE TILTING HUGELY.
A LOT OF REPUBLICANS ARE SHOWING
A SHIFT THERE, OLDER PEOPLE.
SO IT'S NOT JUST LIBERALS AND
DEMOCRATS, IT'S ACROSS THE BOARD
SHIFT, AND THE CONTRAST ON THE
ABORTION ISSUE, FOR EXAMPLE,
ANOTHER HOT-BUTTON ISSUE, THOSE
HAVEN'T BUDGED IN 20 YEARS, IF
YOU LOOK AT THE GALLU GALLUP POE
SAME 50/50 SPLIT ON ABORTION BUT
GAY RIGHTS, THE CHANGE IS VERY
DRAMATIC.
EVEN THE HARD-CORE OPPONENTS OF
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE SEE THIS IS
GOING ON.
THEY DON'T REALLY DENY THAT
TREND.
>> Woodruff: AND DAVID CRARY,
WHAT MAKES IT FASCINATING IS WE
ARE SEEING PLAYING OUT ACROSS
THE COUNTRY, AS WE MENTIONED, IN
STATE AFTER STATE, THERE ARE SO
MANY STATES THAT HAVE BANNED
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE BUT COURTS --
THE COURTS ARE PUTTING A STOP TO
IT.
LET'S LOOK AT -- NOW, THIS WAS A
GRAPHIC SHOWING THE STATES IN
ORANGE, SAME-SEX MARRIAGE NOT
ALLOWED IN GREEN STATES, IT IS
ALLOWED.
BUT, DAVID CRARY, THE COURTS
HAVE STEPPED IN TO INTERVENE.
>> THEY'VE DONE MORE THAN THAT,
A DOZEN CASES SINCE LAST
DEMBER ALL STRIKING DOWN BANS
OR PART OF THE STATE BANS IN
THEIR SOCIETY.
IT'S BEEN A WINNING STREAK ON
ONE SIDE, LOSING ON THE OTHER
WITH NO EXCEPTIONS.
IT'S PRETTY STRIKING.
THE NEXT STEP WILL BE TO GO TO
THE LEVEL OF U.S. CIRCUIT
COURTS.
THEY WILL BE HEARING APPEALS OF
SOME OF THESE DECISIONS.
THOSE WILL COME DOWN PROBABLY
THIS SUMMER, MAYBE IN DENVER.
THEY WILL RULE ON THE STATUS OF
UTAH'S AND OKLAHOMA'S GAY
MARRIAGE BANS.
THERE WILL BE A HEARING IN
CINCINNATI OF FOUR DIFFERENT
STATE CASES, ONE SINGLERI
SO IT'S GOING TO BE AN
INTERESTING SUMMER AS ALL THESE
LITIGATED CASE MOVE ONE STEP
HIGHER UP ON THE FEDERAL COURT
SYSTEM.
>> AND EDWARD-ISAAC DOVERE, FOR
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION, THEY
REALLY CAN'T BE INVOLVED IN
THOSE CASES BUT THEY'RE
OBVIOUSLY WATCHING WITH
INTEREST.
>> AND WITH SUPPORT.
AT THIS POINT IN THE LAST WEEK,
THE LAST STATE THAT DIDN'T HAVE
A COURT CHALLENGE TO A GAY
MARRIAGE BAN NOW HAS ONE, THIS
IS NORTH DAKOTA.
THIS IS SOMETHING THE
ADMINISTRATION IS IN FAVOR OF
AND THEY HAVE BEEN DOING WHAT
THEY CAN TO INTERPRET THE LEGAL
RULINGS THAT HAVE COME DOWN IN
FAVOR OF GAY MARRIAGE AS BROADLY
AS POSSIBLE, SPECIFICALLY THE
WINDSOR DECISION THAT STRUCK
DOWN THE DEFENSIVE MARRIAGE ACT
LAST SPRING, THEY'VE TRIED IN
EVERY WAY THAT THEY CAN TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO APPLY AS MANY
RIGHTS TO GAY COUPLE I COUPLES R
FEDERAL MARRIAGE STATUTES AS
POSSIBLE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE THE
POLITICS OF THIS?
WE ARE IN A CONGRESSIONAL
ELECTION YEAR.
THE ADMINISTRATION WOULD LIKE TO
ENERGIZE THE DEMOCRATIC BASE,
THE LIBERAL BASE.
HOW MUCH DOES THIS, WHAT'S
HAPPENING, WHAT WE HAVE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT, PLAY INTO THAT?
>> THIS IS DEFINITELY PART OF
IT.
WHEN THE PRESIDENT TALKS ABOUT
WHAT DEMOCRATS NEED TO DO AT THE
MID-TERM, EVERY FUNDRAISER SAYS
DEMOCRATS HAVE A TENDENCY TO
FALL ASLEEP OR NOT PAY ATTENTION
IN MID-TERM.
HE WANTS TO MAKE SURE AS FEW
PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE SPECIFICALLY
THE BASE BUY INTO THE NARRATIVES
THAT THE PRESIDENT IS DONE WITH
ANY BIG THINGS.
THIS IS ABOUT MAKING PEOPLE
BELIEVE THE PRESIDENT IS STILL
DOING GREAT THINGS AND MAKING
THE GAY COMMUNITY BELIEVE THAT
AND IN A BROADER WAY WE'VE SEEN
POLLS AS GAY RIGHTS AS THE
PRESIDENT'S WAY OF CONNECTING
WHE VALUES.
>> Woodruff: AND IN THE LGBT
COMMUNITY, HOW DO THEYAD
THE ADMINISTRATION IS DOING?
>> I THINK THEY'RE VERY PLEASED
WHAT THE ADMINISTRATION IS
GOING.
I ALSO THINK THEY'RE VERY
PLEASED AT WHAT THEY SEE
HAPPENING IN THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY IN TERMS OF THE REPUBLICAN
OFFICER HOLDERS BEGINNING TO SHY
AWAY FROM THIS BATTLE.
YOU SEE REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS IN
GAY MARRIAGE STATES KIND OF
ACCEPTING THE FETA COMPLI.
CHRIS CHRISTIE, THE GOVERNOR IN
PENNSYLVANIA THAT DECIDED NOT TO
APPEAL WHEN THEY STRUCK DOWN GAY
MARRIAGE.
IN WASHINGTON THERE WAS ONE
REPUBLICAN MEMBER OF CONGRESS
WHO APPEARED FOUR OR FIVE, TEN
YEARS AGO WHO WOULD HAVE BEEN
MORE.
SO I THINK LGBT ACTIVISTS ARE
CAUTIOUSLY PLEASED D.P.S. SEE
THIS AS A WINNING ISSUE AND
REPUBLICANS NO LONGER SEEM TO
WANT TO GO TO THE MAT TO FIGHT
ABOUT IT.
>> Woodruff: INTERESTING
CHANGES.
DAVID CRARY, EDWARD-ISAAC
DOVERE, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AND FINALLY TONIGHT,
AN EXTRAORDINARY HONOR FOR AN
EXTRAORDINARY DEED.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR STORY.
>> Reporter: BY NOVEMBER, 2010,
U.S. MARINES WERE NINE MONTHS
INTO THE FIRST BIG PUSH OF
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S AFGHAN SURGE
TO RE-TAKE MARJAH, A TALIBAN-
HELD DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN
HELMAND PROVINCE.
LANCE CORPORAL KYLE CARPENTER
WAS 21, PART OF "F" COMPANY, 2ND
BATTALION, 9TH MARINES.
>> WE WERE TASKED WITH PUSHING
SOUTH INTO AN ENEMY STRONGHOLD
TERRITORY AND IT WAS PRETTY
SIMPLE.
I MEAN, WE WERE JUST TASKED WITH
TAKING OVER A NEW COMPOUND.
>> Reporter: BUT THINGS DIDN'T
QUITE GO THAT EASILY, RIGHT?
THE ENEMY WAS GETTING CLOSER AND
CLOSER?
>> THEY WERE.
WE KNEW IT WAS GONNA BE BAD.
WE KNEW WE WERE PROBABLY GONNA
TAKE CASUALTIES.
WE DIDN'T KNOW HOW BAD BUT WHEN
WE GOT DOWN THERE, VERY SHORTLY
AFTER MOVING IN, GOT OUR FIRST
GRENADE ATTACK, IT BECAME EVEN
MORE REAL THAN WHAT WE HAD
ANTICIPATED.
>> Reporter: MORE REAL.
TELL ME, WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
>> WELL, I MEAN, UP UNTIL THAT
POINT, FOR MONTHS AND MONTHS,
OUR WORRIES WERE I.E.D.s,
STEPPING ON I.E.D.s, AND PRETTY
MUCH FROM SUN UP TO SUNDOWN, ON
MOST DAYS, WE WERE IN
FIREFIGHTS.
USUALLY IT WAS VERY UNCOMMON TO
SEE HAND GRENADES BECAUSE THOSE
ARE VERY, UM, MORE OF A HAND-TO-
HAND, YOU KNOW, VERY SHORT
RANGE TYPE WEAPON.
SO FOR THEM TO GET THAT CLOSE---
>> Reporter: THAT-- THAT TELLS
YOU HOW CLOSE THEY WERE.
THE MARINES KNEW IT WAS A
QUESTION OF WHEN, NOT IF,
GRENADES WOULD BE THROWN ON
THEIR POSITION.
ON NOVEMBER 21ST IT HAPPENED.
CARPENTER WAS STATIONED ON A
ROOFTOP WITH A FELLOW MARINE
WHEN THE GRENADE LANDED.
HE DOVE ON IT TO SAVE THE LIFE
OF LANCE CORPORAL NICK EUFRAZIO.
HOW MUCH DO YOU REMEMBER ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENED ON THAT DAY THAT
YOU WERE WOUNDED?
>> WELL IT'S KIND OF OPPOSITE
WHAT MOST PEOPLE THINK.
I DON'T REALLY REMEMBER ANYTHING
OF THE ENTIRE DAY, AND
ESPECIALLY THE MOMENTS LEADING
UP TO BEING INJURED BY THE
GRENADE.
ALL I REMEMBER IS A FEW BRIEF
SECONDS BEFORE I WENT
UNCONSCIOUS AFTER I WAS INJURED.
>> Reporter: CARPENTER HAD
ABSORBED MUCH OF THE BLAST HIS
ARMS WERE MANGLED, HIS JAW AND
MOUTH NEARLY DESTROYED, HIS
SKULL WAS FRACTURED, HE LOST HIS
RIGHT EYE, AND HAD A COLLAPSED
LUNG.
HE WAS LOSING MASSIVE AMOUNTS OF
BLOOD
>> I COULDN'T REALLY HEAR
ANYTHING AND MY VISION WAS AS IF
YOU WERE LOOKING AT A TV AND IT
DIDN'T HAVE CABLE HOOKED UP TO
IT AND IT WAS JUST THAT WHITE,
GREY STATIC LOOK.
THE NEXT THING I REMEMBERED IS
WHAT FELT LWH
WATER POURING ALL OVER ME FROM
THE BLOOD THAT HAD STARTED TO
COME OUT.
>> Reporter: THAT WAS YOUR
BLOOD?
>> YES, SIR.
AND THEN AFTER THAT, I THOUGHT
ABOUT MY FAMILY AND THOUGHT
ABOUT HOW DEVASTATED AND UPSET
THEY WERE GOING TO BE THAT I WAS
KILLED IN AFGHANISTAN.
>> Reporter: YOU WERE REALIZING
AT THAT MOMENT THAT YOU MIGHT
WELL DIE?
>> VERY MUCH.
>> Reporter: CARPENTER FLATLINED
IN THE MEDEVAC CHOPPER.
WHEN HE ARRIVED AT THE FIELD
HOSPITAL HE WAS LABELED P-E-A,
PATIENT EXPIRED ON ARRIVAL, SO
GRIEVOUS WERE HIS WOUNDS.
WHAT LAY AHEAD WAS ANOTHERNG CAR
TWO-AND-A-HALF YEARS IN
HOSPITALS AND REHABILITATION,
DOZENS OF SURGERIES, PAINFUL
RECONSTRUCTIONS AND SKIN GRAFTS.
HE SAYS IT GOT HIM DOWN.
>> BUT THOSE WERE JUST A FEW
TIMES.
GOING INTO THE PRE-OP.
SO MANY TIMES.
GETTING STUCK HERE AND GETTING
STUCK THERE AND KNOWING YOU'RE
GONNA BE ALL CUT UP AND BANDAGED
UP AND HURTING WHEN YOU GET OUT.
>> Reporter: YOU HAD TO LEARN TO
DO A LOT OF THINGS AGAIN, RIGHT?
NORMAL EVERYDAY THINGS FROM
WALKING TO BRUSHING YOUR TEETH.
>> WELL STARTING OUT, MY MOM
BRUSHED MY TEETH FOR A LONG
TIME.
AND THEN KIND OF WHEN I GOT TO
BE ABLE TO DO IT I WOULD AND
THEN MONTHS AND MONTHS DOWN THE
ROAD I FINALLY LEARNED HOW TO
PUT MY SOCKS ON SO I STARTED
DOING THAT.
SO IT'S STILL DEFINITELY A
LEARNING PROCESS, I MEAN JUST
THIS PAST WEEK, YOU KNOW, DOING
THINGS YOU LEARN HOW TO MAKE IT
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: REALLY EVEN, EVEN
UP TO TODAY?
WHAT ABOUT THE PHYSICAL SCARS?
WAS THAT HARD TO GET USED TO?
THE CHANGES IN THE WAY YOU
LOOKED OR MAYBE EVEN THE WAY
THAT PEOPLE LOOKED AT YOU?
>> NO.
ON BECE,SE MY TIME AT WALTER
REED REALLY HELPED ME BEING WITH
ALL THE OTHER INJURED MILITARY
SERVICE MEMBERS THAT I WAS.
AND IT'S NEVER REALLY BEEN HARD.
I LOOK AT IT MORE AS, IF I HAVE
TO HAVE THESE SCARS, I GOT THEM
IN DEFENSE OF OUR NATION AND
RAISING MY RIGHT HAND AND
VOLUNTEERING TO GO IN HARMS WAY
FOR PEOPLE BACK HERE AT HOME
JUST LIKE EVERYBODY ELSE IN THE
MILITARY DOES.
SO I WOULD SAY I'M MORE PROUD OF
THEM.
>> Reporter: REALLY?
HIS EXTRAORDINARY COURAGE AND
SACRIFICE HAD NOT GONE
UNNOTICED, CARPENTER'S NAME WAS
PUT FORWARD BY HIS COMMANDERS
FOR THE MEDAL OF HONOR AND THIS
PAST FEBRUARY, HE RECEIVED A
PHONE CALL FROM THE PRESIDENT.
>> BASED ON THE RECOMMENDATION
OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE AND
THE SECRETARY OF THE NAVY, I'VE
APPROVED THE AWARD OF THE MEDAL
OF HONOR TO YOU.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU FIRST
LEARNED YOU'D BE RECEIVING IT,
YOU STRUGGLED A BIT WITH IT.
WHY?
>> YOU KNOW, I'M SUPPOSED TO
WEAR THIS MEDAL WHEN EVERYDAY I
WOULD GO DOWN TO THE CAFETERIA
IN THE BUILDING I LIVED AT, AT
WALTER REED, AND ME AND ALL MY
MARINE BUDDIES WOULD BE THERE
AND YOU LOOK AROUND AND YOU SEE
ONE OR TWO QUADRUPLE AMPUTEES.
GUYS THAT HAVE NO LIMBS, AND I'M
SITTING HERE GETTING READY TO BE
HONORED IN FRONT OF THE ENTIRE
NATION.
BUT...
>> Reporter: THAT CAN BE HARD.
>> I DID STRUGGLE AT FIRST, BUT
NOW I HAVE THE MINDSET OF I CAN
WEAR IT FOR THEM, AND I CAN TRY
TO DO GOOD THINGS FOR THEM AND
REALLY I GUESS MY HONOR IS THEIR
HONOR.
>> Reporter: AND EARLIER THIS
AFTERNOON AT THE WHITE HOUSE,
CARPENTER BECAME THE THIRD
MARINE AND 15TH OVERALL
RECIPIENT SINCE 9/11 OF THE
NATION'S HIGHEST MILITARY HONOR
FOR CONSPICUOUS GALLANTRY.
>> THE MAN YOU SEE BEFORE YOU
TODAY, CORPORAL WILLIAM KYLE
CARPENTER.
SHOULD NOT BE ALIVE TODAY.
YOU NOTICE THAT KYLE DOESN'T
HIDE HIS SCARS, HE'S PROUD OF
THEM AND THE SERVICE THAT THEY
REPRESENT.
NOW HE TELLS ME THIS AND YOU
KNOW SO I'M JUST QUOTING HIM,
BUT HE SAYS THE "GIRLS
DEFINITELY LIKE THEM."
( LAUGHTER )
SO HE'S KIND OF, HE'S WORKING AN
ANGLE ON THIS THING.
( LAUGHTER )
I WASN'T SURE WHETHER I WAS
SUPPOSED TO SAY THAT IN FRONT OF
MOM.
( LAUGHTER )
BUT THERE'S A QUOTE THERE.
ANYBODY WHO HAS A HAD A CHANCE
TO GET TO KNOW THIS YOUNG MAN
KNOWS YOU ARE NOT GOING TO GET A
BETTER EXAMPLE OF WHAT YOU WANT
IN AN AMERICAN OR A MARINE.
KEEP IN MIND AT THE TIME KYLE
WAS JUST 21-YEARS-OLD.
BUT IN THAT INSTANT HE FULFILLED
THOSE WORDS OF SCRIPTURE.
"GREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN THAN
THIS.
A MAN LAY DOWN HIS LIFE FOR HIS
FRIENDS."
( APPLAUSE )
>> Reporter: A NUMBER OF
CARPENTER'S FAMILY MEMBERS,
FRIENDS, AND COMRADES LOOKED ON.
ONE NOT THERE WAS THE MAN HE
SAVED, NICK EUFRAZIO SUFFERED
BRAIN DAMAGE IN THE GRENADE
ATTACK AND REMAINS DISABLED.
THESE DAYS, 24-YEAR-OLD KYLE
CARPENTER SPEAKS TO YOUNG
AUDIENCES ABOUT HIS EXPERIENCES
AND HE'S IN SCHOOL HIMSELF, A
PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH CAROLINA.
THIS ALL HAPPENED TO YOU WHEN
YOU WERE SO YOUNG.
YOU'RE STILL SO YOUNG.
DOES IT MAKE YOU FEEL LIKE, I
DON'T KNOW, LIKE YOU HAVE A
SECOND LEASE ON LIFE OR A
MISSION FOR THE REST OF YOUR
LIFE?
>> IT HAS MADE ME REALLY WANT TO
EXPERIENCE AND I GUESS FEEL LIFE
EVERY SINGLE DAY.
>> Reporter: FEEL LIFE?
>> MM-HMM.
I MEAN, JUST THINGS LIKE DRIVNG
AROUND WITH THE WINDOWS DOWN IN
MY CAR, OR THE DOORS OFF, WHICH
DRIVES MY MOM CRAZY, BUT...
>> Reporter: YOU'RE STILL HER
YOUNG SON, RIGHT?
>> OH YEAH.
OH YEAH.
JUST SIMPLE THINGS LIKE THAT.
IF IT'S SOMETHING NEW OR
SOMETHING THAT, YOU KNOW, IS
GOING TO GET ME EXCITED OR GET
THE ADRENALINE GOING OR WHATEVER
IT IS TO MAKE ME REALLY FEEL
LIKE I AM REALLY MAKING THIS
SECOND CHANCE THAT I HAVE BEEN
BLESSED WITH WORTH IT, I
ABSOLUTELY DO THAT AND I TRY TO
DO EVERYTHING I CAN.
>> Reporter: I UNDERSTAND YOU'RE
EVEN SKYDIVING NOW.
>> I HAVE ONCE, UH I'M STILL
LETTING MOM RECOVER FROM THE
FIRST TIME BEFORE THE SECOND
ONE.
( LAUGHS )
>> Reporter: YOU'RE BEING
HONORED AS A HERO. DO YOU FEEL
LIKE A HERO?
>> NO SIR.
I FEEL LIKE I'M ON AN EVEN
PLAYING FIELD AND AN EVEN
PLATFORM WIT
AWARDS OR NOT, WITH EVERYBODY
ELSE THAT RAISED THEIR RIGHT
HAND AND SAID YOU KNOW I'LL
GOING INTO HARMS WAY.
>> Reporter: WELL CORPORAL KYLE
CARPENTER, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
TALKING TO US, AND BEHALF OF ALL
OF US AT THE NEWSHOUR WE WISH
YOU THE VERY BEST.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH, I
APPRECIATE THAT.
T'S WHY THEY CALL IT
CONSPICUOUS GALLANTRY.
WE HAVE AN EXTENDED INTERVIEW
WITH CORPORAL CARPENTER, YOU CAN
WATCH THAT ON OUR RUNDOWN.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ANNOUNCED THE
U.S. IS SENDING UP TO 300
MILITARY ADVISERS TO IRAQ BUT NO
COMBAT TROOPS.
ON THE GROUND IN IRAQ,
GOVERNMENT TROOPS BATTLED
INSURGENTS FOR CONTROL OF THE
COUNTRY'S LARGEST OIL REFINERY
FOR A THIRD DAY.
AND, REPUBLICANS IN THE U.S.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTED
A NEW MAJORITY LEADER, KEVIN
McCARTHY OF CALIFORNIA.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, "DOOMSAYERS"
HAVE LONG SAID THE END OF
AMERICAN ENERGY PRODUCTION IS
NEAR.
BUT THERE'S NO REASON TO GET
DOWN, SAYS AUTHOR ROBERT BRYCE,
WHO ZEROES IN ON HOW INNOVATION
IN OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION IS
GIVING THE U.S. A COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE.
YOU CAN READ HIS COLUMN, ON
MAKING SENSE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE EXAMINE THE SURGE
IN THE NUMBER OF UNACCOMPANIED
CHILDREN FROM CENTRAL AMERICA,
ENTERING THE UNITED STATES
ILLEGALLY.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS AMONG
OTHERS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.